---
layout: post
title:  "Aftershokz Bluez Bone Conduction Headphones"
category: "blog"
author: Marc Thomas
date:   2013-04-16 12:00:00
categories: review aftershokz technology headphones wireless bluetooth
---

Back in February, I had ordered myself the Aftershokz Bluez bone conduction headphones. Nearly 2 months later, a package arrived and much excitement ensued. I've been using the headphones pretty heavily over the past two weeks and thought I would share my experiences starting with what makes these headphones different than any other headphone on the market. 

_What are bone conduction headphones?_
The Aftershokz bone conduction technology utilizes an open ear design by pumping vibrations through your cheek bone directly into your inner ear. The open ear design allows a listener to be aware of their surroundings and enjoy their music simultaneously. There are many use cases and environments where the open ear design is both suitable and desirable including the workplace, public and private settings, and even while working out. Each of these use cases I will cover in some detail.

_Connecting to Devices_
    This is a very important feature for a bluetooth headphone. Connecting the Bluez to my Nexus 4 was extremely simple and fast, taking all of about 5 seconds.There are two major uses for these headphones and those are media playback and phone calls. 
First, we have media playback. Media playback works just as expected. You launch your media application, hit play and enjoy your music. There is a media control on the headphones which pauses and resumes audio. It also works exactly as expected. One limitation however is that if you have not already initiated music from your phone, there doesn't appear to be a way to activate it solely from the headset. In fact, the headset appears to go into some sort of minimalist power saving mode when it is not receiving audio. This does wonders for the battery life, unfortunately it seems to cause some other technical issues. Specifically when it comes to voice dialing. 
    Stock android uses Google's own voice dialing app. I have found this app to be absolutely amazing in correctly translating speech to text. To initiate voice dialing from the headset, press and hold the phone button for about 2 seconds. In theory, this should activate the voice prompt. It is at this point that things get rocky. Even though the voice dialer is activated, there is no audible prompt. It took quite a bit of testing, but if you wait the correct amount of time for the prompt to finish before speaking then you can initiate a phone call via voice. This is a severe limitation that needs to be fixed. There is a way around this though. If you already have music playing and then initiate the voice dialer, the voice prompt will be audible. This method allows you to be able to navigate the voice dialer but also has it's drawbacks. Mainly that the music you have playing does not suspend or even reduce in volume which can be both distracting and annoying. Additionally, the vibrations from the bone conducers seem to throw off the microphone making the voice dialer fail in translating speech.

_In the Office_
Like many people, while at work I like to listen to music. Mostly just to avoid the monotonous silence and key clicking from myself and everyone around me. I don't however, like it when I get startled by someone walking up behind me to ask a question. This is a problem I experience on a nearly daily basis when I am wearing my traditional Bose in ear headphones. Another problem I run into is when someone starts talking to me, I have to remove the headphones from my ears so that I can hear them clearer, and so I don't raise my voice unconsciously.
With the open ear design, I have discovered that while listening to music, I can still hear people entering the room just as clearly as if I had not been wearing any headphones. I can also carry on a conversation without removing the headphones. Because my ear's are not blocked, I do not unconsciously compensate by raising the volume of my voice, and neither does the other person need to speak louder for me to hear. It is also entirely possible to continue a conversation without pausing the music, though I do find pausing the music to have a couple benefits. It's slightly less distracting for myself, and also more courteous to the person I am speaking to.
One potential problem with listening to music while in a quiet environment is that the headphones have to be kept rather low or else there is "leakage", meaning that other people can hear your music and it might distract them. That being said, I was able to set my volume at a comfortable and audible level far below where the leakage occurred. This is more a problem for people who prefer their music on the louder side.

_In Public_
Over the weekend I went grocery shopping. There are always lots of people at the grocery store, and it is always quite noisy. I've never enjoyed wearing headphones in public since being aware of my surroundings is very important especially in crowded areas. The open ear design allowed me to keep track of my surroundings and still listen to my music. I did have to turn the volume up a bit otherwise the music would get overpowered by the surrounding noise. This did cause one problem, and that is that the louder music made it more challenging to understand what people were saying. However, I could still identify that a person was speaking where as with regular headphones I would have been completely unaware. 
In regards to the leakage problem I mentioned above, I did not notice it being an issue in public even with the louder volume setting. It seems that louder ambient noise counteracts the leakage. I tested this very scientifically... by holding out the headphones about 2 feet from my head and not hearing anything from the headphones.  (+1 for science!)

_In Private_
In my home, I often have music and podcasts playing from my computer speakers to break up the silence.  For 2 days I decided to use my headphones instead of my computer speakers. It worked out quite well. I kept the volume at about the same level as when I am in the office. It is during this time that I focused more on the quality of the audio. The details regarding quality are in the _”Sound Quality”_ paragraph down below. The portability of the headphones was very enjoyable. I could walk from one end of my apartment all the way to the other and not lose connection nor did I experience sound degradation. Keep in mind that my apartment is not overly big, so I would except the range not to cover an apartment or house that is significantly larger than mine. The nice thing about this portability is that my music never disappeared whereas right now if I have music playing on my computer speakers, it gets harder to hear the further away I get. 

_Running Test_
    Over the weekend I went for a 4 mile run and for the first time in years I wore headphones, the Aftershokz Bluez. I was extremely happy with the results of this test. It was a slightly windy day and there was traffic along all the roads I ran on. To begin, I had to turn my volume up closer to the levels used while out in public. After setting the volume to a comfortable level I could hear both my music, and the noises around me very clearer. I could hear cars passing, dogs barking, and more. I could even hear the guy washing his car around the corner before I saw him. This was a major success. My main worry about wearing headphones while running or cycling is the lack of awareness to one's surroundings. With the Aftershokz, I did not feel like I was putting myself in that situation. A few days later I went for another run and listened to a podcast. Again, I had no difficulty listening both to the podcast speakers, and the world around me simultaneously.
 
_Phone Calls_
I don't make or receive many phone calls, however I do like my headphones to have the capability of answering and making calls should the event occur. I currently use the Bose in ear headphones which have a built in microphone. It's works pretty well in a pinch but I can't wear them in the car and I really don't like being wired to my phone. I also the have Bose Bluetooth earpiece 1st generation which I absolutely love and would constantly have in my ear while driving or out in public. The Bose Bluetooth does not support media however, and even if it did it is a closed ear design. Enter Aftershokz... This headset has media and phone controls, while being wireless and leaving my ears open. Pretty much the perfect solution. 
So how does it compare? There is a difference in sound quality which I will cover in the next paragraph. But the basic idea is that the Bose appears to have slightly higher quality in both the speaker and the microphone. But neither difference is significant enough to render the Aftershokz undesirable. The comfort level is very similar and probably comes down to a personal preference. The bose has an in ear design which is extremely comfortable compared to other ear pieces, while the Aftershokz have a band that wraps around the back of the head. Neither of them bother me, but I will point out that I notice the Aftershokz more than I notice the Bose. In fact there are many times I completely forget I am wearing my Bose. Forgetting I am wearing the Aftershokz does happen as well, but seemingly less often. 

_Sound Quality and Comfort_
So how can a device with no speakers compare to the traditional sound producing devices? Surprisingly well. But it's not perfect. When I first put on the Aftershokz and began playing music, I genuinely believed my ear's were just picking up the sound from the “speakers” of the device, and that it wasn't doing what it claimed. Then I tried a little test by putting in ear plugs. I am no longer a skeptic. It truly is sending sound directly to your inner ear. In fact it wasn't until I did this that I noticed just how much sound quality was being lost.
Without any earplugs, it is very easy to hear the mid range of music, and while you can still hear the highs and the lows, they are not nearly as prominent. The exception is if you turn up the headphones very loudly, then the highs and lows become much more prominent. Under normal volume conditions however, the open ear design seems to let these 2 ranges escape the confines of the ear, or perhaps the ambient noise overrides it. Either way, it is significant enough to be noticed if you are really listening to the music as was the case for my _”In Private”_ scenario a. For the casual listener, the runner, the office worker, the grocery shopper,  or the many other scenarios where music is not the focus of the moment, the loss in quality is barely noticed.
As per comfort, I found the form factor of the Aftershokz slightly annoying at first. It  continuously slipped and took me a bit of time adjusting the strap to find the right fit. That being said, after I found the right fit it has been extremely comfortable. I have been wearing this for about 8-10 hours a day nearly every day and often forget it is even there. Over the weekend I was at a tech conference and wore it from about 6 am to 11 pm. It's surprisingly comfortable. During my run I only had to adjust it once, which I think is pretty reasonable considering all the impact motion that running causes.

_The Good_
    There are many really great things about this technology. I think the biggest selling point for me would be the open ear design. It's flexibility to let you wear it and still be completely aware of your surrounding without removing the device is a huge advantage over traditional headphones. The price is extremely competitive for a bluetooth headset and microphone, especially considering the uniqueness of the technology. The battery life is very good. On several occasions I have drained my phone and my headphones still had power.  

_The Less Good_
    The Aftershokz do fall short in a couple respects when compared to traditional headphones. The most painful shortcoming is the way it handles hands free voice dialing. The loss in sound quality and the leakage of sound at higher volumes are also problems, but depending on how loud you like your music and how strongly you care about the sound quality in a bluetooth headphone this may or may not be an issue.



