---
layout: post
title:  "Elementary OS "Freya" Review"
category: "blog"
author: Marc Thomas
date:   2014-12-15 12:00:00
categories: technology linux ElementaryOS Elementary ubuntu review
---


About a month ago, I decided to do the unthinkable. I formatted by perfectly running Arch Linux install on my primary computer, a System 76 Galago Ultrapro. There was absolutely nothing wrong with the setup, so my reasoning for doing this move can only be described as boredom. I've been using the same install, with the same desktop environment (Gnome 3.18) and window manager (Awesome WM), with the same everything for over a year. While I was perfectly productive, I was starting to get a bit bored with it and desired something different. Something I was less familiar with, and that was a bit newer, shiner, and maybe even a bit less refined. Enter Elementary OS.

Before this en devour, I already had some history with Elementary OS. In fact, this is the 4th computer in my household that is running Elementary OS. I have it running on a Macbook Air that my wife uses occasionally, and on two laptops that I purchased and maintain for the local Coder Dojo that I am co-champion of. I also have been financially backing the project on Patreon for several months now, ever since I installed it on the first Coder Dojo laptop. Furthermore, I have also helped install Elementary OS on a few college student machines who's Window's setup wasn't working for them. I've fiddled with Elementary OS primarily on the Coder Dojo laptops in the past, but I've never really sat down with it and tried to get real work done. After all, my work flow is way to complicated and customized for something like Elementary OS, right?

Well, as it turns out, my work flow is complicated, but it's definitely not to complicated for Elementary OS. After all, Pantheon, Elementary OS's desktop environment, is a fork of the rock solid Gnome 3. So much of what makes Gnome great also exists in some form in Pantheon. But, Pantheon has not quite kept up to date with the latest Gnome 3 technologies, and has in some cases fallen behind. More on that in a bit. I've been keeping track of my thoughts as I've been using Elementary OS over the last few weeks. The good, the bad, and the bugs. I've used it to do everything over the past few weeks, and have had relatively minimal disruptions in getting my work done. That might be more of a testament to Linux in a broader sense, rather than Elementary OS, but the statement still stands. Just a short list of the things I've done during the past month with Elementary OS includes: web development, python/gtk development, remotely accessing other Linux and OSX computers, ripping videos, taking a short vacation, voice and video calls, emails, and much more. The only things I've attempted to do that did not go smoothly is compressing video's and using certain GTK debugging tools which actually stems from a larger issue which I will talk about shortly. With that in mind, lets take a break from praising Elementary OS, and talk about some of the issues.

Elementary OS is based on Ubuntu, which is easily one of the most popular Linux distribution both for people to use and for people to fork and base their distribution on. Ubuntu is has a solid base, and one of the best hardware enablement stacks, which basically means that basing your distribution on Ubuntu will guarantee compatibility with most any set of hardware. Being based on Ubuntu also gives your distribution inherited access to Ubuntu's application repository, and PPA system. All of which is a good thing for the end user. But while this is definitely a good thing, I would also argue that it is one of Elementary OS's biggest flaws. 

Ubuntu's slow release of software updates, limited official repositories, and PPA system is flawed, and holds the end user back. Elementary OS inherits this flaw by virtue of being based off Ubuntu. It's my opinion that Elementary OS would greatly benefit from instead being based off the far more competitive Arch. Admittedly, there is a level of personal preference here, but I do have some very solid examples to back this claim up. Arch's updates are done as rolling releases, meaning that when a piece of software is ready, it is shipped out to the user the next time they update. Where as with Ubuntu many pieces of software are only updated when a major version comes out which is typically twice a year. This leaves the user with a system that is largely out of date. Elementary further compounds this issue by intentionally holding back GTK and other core libraries on their system. Many Gnome applications when installed are forced to install versions that are 2-3 years old, rather than their far superior current versions. With an Arch base, we would instead be receiving the latest GTK and other core technologies shortly after they become available. Elementary is actively working on some of this by developing their own forks of popular GTK apps. This is not a bad solution, as it gives the Elementary developers a lot more control over every aspect of their system. But it can also be considered duplicated effort. As all of us in the Linux work know, we love diversity, but the constant reinventing of the wheel is begging to take it's toll on some of us.

Here is an example in which having Ubuntu's dated software archives prevented me from completing my task. For the very specific example, I am going to talk about Handbrake. I use Handbrake on a daily basis to compress video files. On my two Arch machines, I have a configuration that uses h.265 compression and various other settings. I've been using that configuration for about a year now. However, when I installed Handbrake from the PPA (note: not even the official repository despite the software being around for as long as I can remember), I was floored by the fact that the version of Handbrake available on Ubuntu was so old, it didn't even have h.265 compression as an option. So instead, I had to send my video files, about 40-50GB worth, over the network to my server running Arch and compress them there instead. I've had to do this multiple times over the past month, and it has significantly slowed down my work flow. Luckily, this particular work flow occurs largely in the background and is not time sensitive. So no negative repercussions have occurred, but it has resulted in a rather large queue of files waiting to be compressed (78 items at the time of this writing).

There are a few more things I found problematic with Elementary OS. By default, it comes with the Ubuntu Software Center. This is a garbage piece of software that even Canonical has stated they are ceasing development on. I point this out because there is a very real, and very good, alternative that exists called Gnome Software. It is my understanding though that Ubuntu is considering adopting Gnome Software in the near future, and that Elementary OS is also working on their own, so this gripe likely has a forthcoming expiration date and so I will move onto the next item..

The default file manager, Pantheon files, is a gorgeous piece of software and it almost feels wrong to put this in the gripe section, but the single click to open a folder/file bugs the crap out of me, and there appears to be no way from within the application preferences to change it to a double click. It bugs me so much that I actually went and installed Nautilus (very out of date mind you) so I can avoid this behavior. To me, this feels like change for change sake, and does not conform to what the user expects. In fact, there are a few more things that Elementary OS does that feels like change simply for change sake so lets talk about them. Moving server side and client side decorations to the left corner, rather than Gnome's stated guidelines of the top right corner. While all the Elementary OS applications look good like this, a lot of other applications implement their own positioning for window controls, such as Firefox. These applications universally apply the window controls to the top right. This inconsistency really bugs me, and could have been avoided had Elementary OS chosen to stick with the window controls on the right side following their parent project Gnome's guidelines. I've even gone so far as to change my dconf to put system decorations back on the right, but now the Elementary OS applications looks out of place. 

The default key bindings also fall into the category of chance for the sake of change. I found their behavior to be very inconsistent especially when dealing with window snapping, maximizing, and minimizing. Also, moving windows around to different monitors and workspaces didn't make much sense. They also dropped support entirely for switching between different windows of the same application (alt+` on most desktops). I spent about a day and a half with the defaults to try and get used to them, but they just felt wrong. Not only where they inconsistent among themselves, but they didn't line up with Gnome, KDE's, Mac, or Windows key bindings. But, as is expected with Linux it was not hard to change them. After a bit of tweaking, I fixed all the key bindings myself and have not had any further issues. That being said, it is important to have really good defaults, and I think Elementary OS misses the mark on this one.

Elementary OS comes with the open source Nouveau video drivers, and while I am a big proponent of using open source whenever possible, in this case it just isn't ready yet. In the first few days, my computer locked up on me multiple times, requiring me to forcibly restart when streaming video from YouTube. As it turns out, the Nouveau drivers are not quite ready for prime time, and so I had to install the Intel graphics drivers instead. I think Elementary OS should consider changing their default driver because this is a pretty critical problem. And not everyone is willing to try and solve a problem like this on their own. 

This gripe section is actually a lot longer than I had originally anticipated, so let's wrap it up with a few bugs I've run into. And for reference, yes I have reported all of these back to Elementary OS so hopefully they will get addressed soon. 

The application launcher often fails to start properly when first booting up when I press “super+space” right away, or click on “Applications”. It's behavior is very weird, and becomes unusable for an extended period of time. It has even on several occasions required me to log out and back in before it functions again. 
Launching new applications, especially when using keyboard shortcuts to do so, will occasionally cause the application to launch behind your current one. This is especially problematic if you try launching it again without realizing it's hiding behind the window you are looking at. I've have ended up with 5+ terminals because of this before realizing that it probably did launch and I need to switch to it. Also, sometimes it will launch in the foreground, but focus will remain on the previous window you where using it. So if you start typing, input is being sent to the wrong application.
There is some minor screen tearing when you use keyboard shortcuts to switch to a non-existing workspace. Purely cosmetic.
Application snapping animations when moving from side to side is a bit weird for some application, but perfectly fine for others. Might be something to do with GTK 2, and early GTK 3 applications. 
Recently updated applications don't always show up when searching in Slingshot right away, even though you can page to them and open them by clicking on the icon. 
Midori ignores standard keyboard bindings for closing a tab/window and requires ctrl+shift+w and ctrl+shift+q instead of the standard ctrl+w and ctrl+q. This might be a Midori Issue more than an Elementary issue, but considering Elementary OS ships Midori by default, and is known to manually patch applications for their desktop, I feel this is something they could, and should fix.
Selecting a notification from the bell icon should switch focus to the application, but it only does so if you are on the workspace that the application is on, and not every time for that matter. If you are not on the same workspace, the notification gets marked as read, but no other action occurs, requiring you to manually switch workspaces and switch to the appropriate application that generated the notification.

Let's change gears now. I've been ripping pretty hard on Elementary OS for a lot of things. Some of which are in their control, and some of which are not. Let's instead talk a bit about some of the really great things in Elementary OS. Starting with the installation. Not a whole lot to say other than it was dead simple. If you've ever done a Linux install before, than you will not have any issues doing this one. And if you haven't done a Linux install before, then you will probably still find this as easy as you'd expect. After Elementary OS is installed, the most polished startup processes on any Linux distribution occurs. There is a distinct lack of a grub menu when you boot up. Instead, you get a nice Elementary OS logo splash screen. This is the first Linux distribution I have ever used that actually does this, and I have made the comment before many times over the years that all Linux distributions should do this. This is awesome! Details like this might seem minor, but they have a pretty large impact on the end user experience.

I set up my hard drive to be encrypted during the install process, and I was quite surprised to see just how fast the drive decrypted. I think this is probably the fastest system decryption I've ever seen, or maybe its just that beautiful splash screen that distracts me from the decryption time. Either way, it feels fast, and in the end that is what matters most.

The default Elementary OS applications are gorgeous. They take everything that is beautiful about GTK, and kick it up a notch. I would go so far as to say that the Elementary OS theme is the most beautiful and polished of any GTK theme I have used. The included backgrounds are stunning. I had a hard time choosing which to use because they where all so great. 

Multi-monitor support is perfect. Setting up my monitors was dead simple. While in the past I have had some weird behavior with unplugging some monitors, but leaving others plugged in, I did not experience that at all with Elementary OS. Their perfect implementation of handling multiple monitors is what every other desktop environment should strive for.

Sound settings with multiple devices actually work! Let me elaborate. I switch between my computer speakers, headphones with mic, and studio headphones on a regular basis. Often times, I have experienced sound dropping to 0 whenever I switch devices. It's extremely annoying when it does this and I have to drag the volume slider back up every time. On Elementary OS, the sound has remained at a constant volume despite how many times I switch my audio device. It's wonderful!

Desktop notifications are the best I've seen on any Linux distribution. They are clean, unobtrusive, and get out of your way quickly. With the exception of the bug I mentioned earlier, they provide everything you'd expect them to provide. As a possible future feature, it would be nice to be able to respond to the notification directly in the notification itself, but I wouldn't consider this a critical feature. Also, notifications for when a terminal task finishes is amazing! I sometimes have tasks that take several minutes, or hours and it's nice to know when that finishes without having to constantly check the terminal window. 

The multitasking view is also really amazing, and while there are some things that I would like to see improved, by and large it is really solid. It took me a while to get used to the application switching only offering applications on the current workspace, and ignoring applications on other workspaces, but after I adapted my work flow to that it does not bother me anymore. The animations are all very polished. I do appreciate Pantheons focus with the multitasking view. Gnome includes application launching, system search, workspace and application switching all in their overview, Pantheon multitasking view focus' solely on application and workspace switching, and has created Slingshot to absorb the other functionality. I appreciate the separation of tasks, but in the end I think I prefer Gnome's implementation. That being said, Elementary OS's implementation of this has not hindered my work flow in any way.

So what now? I have a lot of gripes about Elementary OS, but I also have found I love a lot of what it has to offer. For the immediate future I think I will end up switching back to Arch+Gnome, primarily because of a few specific applications simply being out of date. But I have a feeling I'll be checking back in with Elementary OS on a regular basis as things progress. I will also continue contributing to them financially. While Elementary OS may not yet be perfect for me, it is absolutely perfect for a lot of people, including my wife, and the kids at my local Coder Dojo. I think Elementary OS has the most potential of any distribution to be considered the “default” Linux someday. I also think that if Elementary OS where to move to an Arch base, a large portion of my complaints would immediately go away. Perhaps just having Pantheon on Arch would be enough, and I may very well try it at some point. At this very moment, if someone where to come to me and ask me what distribution they should try, I would be pretty confident in recommending Elementary OS.
